.\" $Id: mips64emul.1,v 1.8 2004-08-01 11:18:52 debug Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2004 by Anders Gavare.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" 
.\" 
.\" This is a minimal man page for mips64emul. Process this file with
.\"     groff -man -Tascii mips64emul.1    or    nroff -man mips64emul.1
.\"
.TH mips64emul 1 "JULY 2004" mips64emul "User commands"
.SH NAME
.B mips64emul
-- a MIPS machine emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mips64emul
[
.I options
]
[
.I file
[
.I ...
]
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mips64emul
is a MIPS machine emulator. The goals are to emulate
64-bit and 32-bit MIPS-like CPUs and enough surrounding hardware
to fake real machines, capable of running real (unmodified)
operating systems, such as NetBSD, Linux, or OpenBSD, and to assist
in experimenting with MIPS-like code in general. This is a spare time
hobby project, and many things are not implemented yet.

Run
.B mips64emul
without arguments to get a list of available command line options.

If you plan to actually use the emulator, you should read the more 
detailed documentation provided in the
.B doc/
subdirectory of the
.B mips64emul
distribution.

For a normal invokation of the emulator, you need to supply the
.I file
argument. This is the name of a MIPS binary file (an ELF32, ELF64,
a.out, ECOFF or raw binary image) which you wish to run in the emulator.
This file might be an operating system kernel, or perhaps a ROM image 
file.

Appart from the name of a MIPS binary, it is also neccessary to select
which specific emulation mode to use. For example, a MIPS-based machine
from DEC (a DECstation) is very different from a MIPS-based machine
from SGI. This selection is done by supplying the correct command 
line option -D2 or -G22, respectively, in this example.)

(There is an exception to the normal invokation usage mentioned above;
if you want to use the DECstation emulation mode, and have a bootable
DECstation harddisk image, then just supplying the diskimage via the
-d option is sufficient. The filename of the kernel can then be skipped,
as the emulator runs the bootblocks from the diskimage directly and 
doesn't need the kernel as a separate file.)
.SH AUTHOR
Anders Gavare <md1gavan@mdstud.chalmers.se>
.SH BUGS
If you find bugs, please report them to the author.
.SH HISTORY
2004-06-30: Release 0.1
.br
2004-07-02: Release 0.1.1
.br
2004-08-01: Release 0.2

(MIPS is a registered trademark of MIPS Technologies. This project is not
affiliated with MIPS Technologies in any way whatsoever.)
